Impact v Tech - where does one draw the line?
Shourya Pratap Singh


In recent times, as I have come across a number of pitches from engineering undergrads across India working on a number of product ideas in different domains, I seem to have noticed a pattern - there is a focus on making a product which uses so called “State of the Art” technologies, and if it were to be judged solely on the basis of the technological capabilities of the product it could even be better than anything OpenAI rolls out for that matter, only if it had users. This is the tech that we talk about. 

When we talk about the startup ecosystem in India, we see a lot of groups trying to come up with the perfect product for an ideal audience which they believe exists. The point is not about how big or small is the ideal audience they are catering to, but more so is whether they can market it as efficiently to those who they do not cater to. This is what I consider is impact creation. How impactful is the product that you build, such that it can be adopted by much less ideal audiences. 

A very important aspect of product building is balancing the tech and impact factors. In fact, once a survey has been done, and when the product is in ideation and development stages, it is important to constantly measure the impact that you can potentially have. It is a continual process wherein a constant study of the dynamic audiences needs to be done internally, and product testing should be accompanied with how does the audience welcome the product. 

As engineers, most of us forget the most basic principle of startups - the user is the focus. Incorporating SOTA tech is definitely a plus point, but not in the eyes of the user. And as long as it does not matter to the user, it is not going to be a matter of big concern to the startup as well. I would like to portray this through an example I came across recently (the details of course are hidden to avoid recognition). The product was in a field in which I had not heard about significant work done by tech startups, and their idea was to bring the very unorganised industry onto their application by onboarding 3 different kinds of users - based upon their skills. In this industry, it is necessary for all 3 kinds of users to work together to get to the final product in a polished manner. This startup was aiming to enable this. They did an absolutely phenomenal job working on the tech part of it, making sure it would be accessible on web and app and integrated Gemini and LangChain and maybe even some aspects of blockchain and cryptocurrencies. However, one aspect still eluded me. How would a user use it? Digging deep I understood that which they were making was a sophisticated job portal. There was no industry specificity which enabled their product to create an impact in the industry. Just lists and lists of users and their contact details. When given a demo, I did of course understand how there were some very intricacies where certain technologies had been used to make the user’s life easier. It was a case of tech improving the quality of life, without making sure that there would be enough audience to support it anyway. I could go to lengths to talk about what they could have done or what they could not have but it is not my place to comment about that. I, however, would want this example to illustrate that it is more important to look at the bigger picture. Just like a painter who is so deep into painting something, tech startups forget to take a step back. It is very important to take a step back, look at what you have created, look at what is good and what is not, ask others what they feel. It is very important to take that look at the bigger picture. Nuts and bolts can be tightened periodically, it is more essential that your structure (a startup with a sustainable audience) stands. 
